JUDY WOODRUFF: Now: the
fears around the development
of artificial intelligence.
Computer superintelligence is
a long, long way from the stuff
of sci-fi movies, but several
high-profile leaders
and thinkers have been
worrying quite publicly
about what they see
as the risks to come.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman, explores that.
It's part of his weekly
series, Making Sense.
ACTOR: I want to talk to you
about the greatest scientific
event in the history of man.
ACTOR: Are you building an A.I.?
PAUL SOLMAN: A.I.,
artificial intelligence.
ACTRESS: Do you think I
might be switched off?
ACTOR: It's not up to me.
ACTRESS: Why is it up to anyone?
PAUL SOLMAN: Some version of
this scenario has had prominent
tech luminaries and scientists
worried for years.
In 2014, cosmologist Stephen
Hawking told the BBC:
STEPHEN HAWKING, Scientist
(through computer voice):
I think the development
of full artificial
intelligence could spell
the end of the human race.
PAUL SOLMAN: And just this
week, Tesla and SpaceX
entrepreneur Elon Musk
told the ÑMDNMÑNational
Governors Association:
ELON MUSK, CEO, Tesla
Motors: A.I. is a
fundamental existential
risk for human civilization.
And I don't think people
fully appreciate that.
PAUL SOLMAN: OK, but
what's the economics angle?
Well, at Oxford University's
Future of Humanity Institute,
founding director Nick Bostrom
leads a team trying to figure
out how best to invest in,
well, the future of humanity.
NICK BOSTROM, Oxford University:
We are in this very peculiar
situation of looking back
at the history of our species,
100,000 years old, and now
finding ourselves just before
the threshold to what looks
like it will be this transition
to some post-human era of
superintelligence that
can colonize the universe,
and then maybe last
for billions of years.
PAUL SOLMAN: Philosopher Bostrom
has been perhaps the most
prominent thinker about the
benefits and dangers
to humanity of what he
calls superintelligence
for many years.
NICK BOSTROM: Once there is
superintelligence, the fate of
humanity may depend on what that
superintelligence does.
PAUL SOLMAN: There are
plenty of ways to invest in
humanity, he says, giving
money to anti-disease
charities, for example.
But Bostrom thinks
longer-term, about investing
to lessen existential
risks, those that threaten
to wipe out the human
species entirely.
Global warming might be one.
But plenty of other people are
worrying about that, he says.
So, he thinks about other risks.
What are the greatest
of those risks?
NICK BOSTROM: The
greatest existential
risks arise from certain
anticipated technological
breakthroughs that we
might make, in particular,
machine superintelligence,
nanotechnology,
and synthetic biology,
fundamentally because we
don't have the ability
to uninvent anything
that we invent.
We don't, as a human
civilization, have the
ability to put the genie
back into the bottle.
Once something has been
published, then we are
stuck with that knowledge.
PAUL SOLMAN: So Bostrom
wants money invested
in how to manage A.I.
NICK BOSTROM: Specifically
on the question, if and when
in the future you could build
machines that were really
smart, maybe superintelligent,
smarter than humans, how
could you then ensure
that you could control what
those machines do, that they
were beneficial, that they were
aligned with human intentions?
PAUL SOLMAN: How likely is it
that machines would develop
basically a mind of their own,
which is what you're
saying, right?
NICK BOSTROM: I do think
that advanced A.I., including
superintelligence, is a sort of
portal through which
humanity will have passage,
assuming we don't destroy
ourselves prematurely
in some other way.
Right now, the human
brain is where it's at.
It's the source of almost all
of the technologies we have.
PAUL SOLMAN: I'm
relieved to hear that.
(LAUGHTER)
NICK BOSTROM: And the complex
social organization we have.
PAUL SOLMAN: Right.
NICK BOSTROM: It's why
the modern condition is
so different from the
way that the chimpanzees
live.
It's all through the
human brain's ability to
discover and communicate.
But there is no reason to
think that human intelligence
is anywhere near the greatest
possible level of intelligence
that could exist, that we are
sort of the smartest possible
species.
I think, rather, that we are
the stupidest possible species
that is capable of creating
technological civilization.
PAUL SOLMAN: And capable
of creating technology
that has begun to surpass
us, first in chess,
then in "Jeopardy," now in
the supposedly impossible
game for a machine to win, Go.
This is just task-oriented
software, some have argued,
and not really intelligence at
all.
Moreover, whatever you call
it, there will be enormous
benefits, says Bostrom.
On the other hand, if we
approach real intelligence,
it could also become a threat.
Think of "Ex Machina" or "The
Matrix" or Elon Musk's fantasy
fear this week about advanced
A.I.
ELON MUSK: Well, it could start
a war by create - - by doing
fake news and spoofing e-mail
accounts and fake press
releases, and just by, you
know, manipulating information.
The pen is mightier
than the sword.
PAUL SOLMAN: So, this is going
to be a cat-and-mouse game
between us and the intelligence?
NICK BOSTROM: That
would be one model.
One line of attack is to try to
leverage the A.I.'s intelligence
to learn what it is that
we value and what
we want it to do.
PAUL SOLMAN: In order to protect
ourselves from what could
be a truly existential risk.
So, how do you get the greatest
good for the greatest number
of present and future humans
beings?
It might be to invest now
in controlling the evolution
of artificial intelligence.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this
is economics correspondent
Paul Solman, reporting from
Oxford, England.